[Music]
The following program is being brought
to you on the Voice America Health and
Wellness channel. For more information
about our network and to check our
additional show hosts and topics of
interest, please visit
voiceameahhealth.com.
The VoiceAmerica Talk Radio Network is
the worldwide leader in live internet
talk radio. Visit voiceamea.com.
The views and ideas expressed on the
following program are strictly those of
the host or guests and do not
necessarily reflect the views and ideas
held by the Voice America Talk Radio
Network, its staff and management.
Welcome to Falling Through the Cracks.
Feel alive and thrive with Dr. Rebecca
Risk. Do you ever feel that even though
nothing seems seriously wrong and you
pass all the medical tests that you
still feel that your health, pain, and
fatigue are completely out of control?
It doesn't have to be that way. Listen
to the tips and suggestions given on our
program today and take back control of
your health. Now, here is Dr. Rebecca
Risk.
Hi everybody. Welcome to Falling Through
the Cracks. Today, we're speaking with
Travis Kristofferson. He re who received
his undergraduate degree in molecular
biology from the Montana State
University honors program and a master's
degree in material engineering and
science from the South Dakota School of
Minds and Technology. Today he's a
full-time science writer and founder of
a cancer charity called Single Cause,
Single Cure. Today we're discussing his
book, Tripping Over the Truth: How the
Metabolic Theory of Cancer is
Overturning One of Medicine's Most
Entrenched Paradigms. So Travis, welcome
to the show.
Thank you. Thanks for having me.
So what inspired you to write this book
about cancer?
You know, I was inspired by it was such
a just compelling scientific story. And
you know, these stories exist, but it's
really hard to to get the general public
to understand them. So um I'd been
following cancer research for some time
and knew that there was this sort of
smoldering debate between the current
theory and these sort of alternative
theories. And it was a, you know, a
beautifully rich narrative that goes all
the way back to the beginning of the
century. And and so it had this kind of
unique historical thread and I thought
it'd make for a very compelling book.
Well, you know, I I agree with you. I I
think we're we're all terrified of of
cancer. Um but, you know, some of the
history that that you brought up in your
book, of course, I had no idea. uh can
you just tell us um about how we
discovered cancer and and how this
started?
Yeah. So the well the original discovery
of what cancer was I mean cancer goes
way back to the Egyptians even further
than that. It's in the fossil record but
um our our sort of true understanding
what it was began well over 100 year
years ago with a German scientist named
Rudolph Verau and he just noticed that
the ve the dominant pathology of cancer
which is just uncontrolled cellular
division. and he was the first to to to
notice that to empirically measure it.
And that's what cancer is. It's it's
uncontrolled pathological cell division.
And from there, of course, the race was
on to discover why this was happening.
And and that's sort of the thread that
we followed through the book is is
following the historical narrative about
how scientists grappled with
understanding why this was occurring.
And so um do we uh do we know exactly
what cancer is?
Well, we do. We do and we don't. We know
how it acts. We know what it does. It it
it begins with cells that lose the
checkpoints of cell division and begin
dividing uncontrollably. It degrades
membranes. It travels through the
circulatory system. That's called
metastasis and that's what kills 95% of
the people um with cancer. So we know
what it is, how it acts, how why it's
doing this is still again is subject to
debate. We thought we knew what it
exactly what was going on in the 70s and
' 80s. It was caused by a sequential
series of mutations, the key genes, but
now that has been really scrutinized
lately because of some uh you know the
important work of the the cancer genome
atlas project. So once again we're back
to I wouldn't say square one. We know a
tremendous amount of the cancer cell,
but the details of exactly why this
process is happening are still being
debated.
Well, you know, it it's interesting when
you bring up the the genetic part
because I think, you know, a lot of us
have grown up or spend, you know,
decades uh believing that, you know, if
cancer is in our family, then we're
going to get it or we have a higher
chance. And so, what what is this now
telling us about our genetics? Is that
not the case? Well, that yeah,
surprisingly the genes you inherit from
your mom and dad only account for about
5 to 7% of all cancers. And you've heard
of, you know, everyone's heard of the
Bracka gene for breast cancer. And even
that, if you inherit that, it doesn't
have what they call 100% penetrance,
meaning if you inherit that mutation,
you're not
100% sure you're going to get the
disease. I think it has 85% penetrance,
which is remarkably high for a for
cancer. So, um, you know, it's not a
death sentence even if you do get
inherit some of these faulty genes, but
it's it's really the minority. The the
genetic inherited genetic cause of
cancer is only a small minority of
cancers. The vast majority occur
spontaneously and and the exact reasons
why they occur again are go back to that
debate.
So, uh I mean some people I I believe
this Angelina Jolie brought this um into
popularity where she had surgery because
she had the gene that could lead to
cancer. But if you're saying it's 5 to
7% of cancers are genetic, did that
change her her chances of getting cancer
at all?
Oh, tremendously. Yeah. it the bracket
gene if you inherit it I believe the
chance of you getting breast or ovarian
goes up to 85%. And so if you're
proactive and do what Angelina did it
greatly diminishes the chance that
you're going to acquire those cancers
obviously. So yeah, I mean that's
obviously a call every individual has to
make, but statistically, you know, to
avoid what she had, that's the right
answer. But, you know, again, her
inheriting that gene is a very minor is
a very minority of all cancers. It's
again it falls into that 5 to 7%.
Right. So, so there's then of course all
the other causes of cancer and do we
understand what that is?
Yeah. Right. Right. So the overt causes
of cancer, we do have a good
understanding of what they are and their
carcinogen list, it's posted on the the
national website, you know, I think it's
200 well over 200 in counting. So we've
we've changed our world tremendously
through, you know, since the industrial
revolution came and we've carcinogens
are everywhere. They're they in the 70s
we didn't even have an idea how bad some
of our consumer products were. For
example, kids pajamas were just soaked
in these screamingly caren carcinogenic
compounds that were supposed to be
anti-inflammatory.
Hair products were were soaked with
screamingly carcinogenic compounds. So,
it's we've really made our world a lot
more, you know, filled with these
cancer-causing agents. And the other
things, you know, are we all know it's
cigarette smoke, um, things like that,
chronic sun exposure. So, we do have a a
good idea of the sort of overt causes of
cancer and what to avoid.
So, you know, I've I've done shows on
on, you know, the toxicity in our
environment and we we're focusing more
on um you know, chemical sensitivities
and um you know, sometimes talking about
the um the cancercausing effects of it.
But I I think it's pretty scary what
we've done with our world. Do you know
when we know that there's 88,000
unregulated chemicals in our homes and
women are exposed to over 500 just
getting ready in the morning?
Yeah, exactly. And we're just starting
to really understand the consequences of
this. And I I'm working on a book on
epigenetics right now. And and these
toxins, they work their way, you know,
into our moms into the fetuses uh when
they're pregnant and can have profound
epigenetic consequences later on. And
those can actually even be inherited by
down the chain. So we are just getting a
good grasp of how you know pervasive
these things are.
Um so what what are um you know that
this is a that's a passionate topic for
me um you know the carcinogen list but
with with cancer are there any other
known causes or theories of um why
cancer is being caused? Cuz I from your
book I understand that's not the only
thing causing cancer.
Yeah, the book centers on the
mitochondrial the metabolic theory of
cancer which states that that cancer
erupts from mitochondrial damage that
it's a problem of of energy generation.
And so and that's what sort of
confounded researchers throughout the
century when they look at the history is
the things that damage mitochondria also
damage nuclear DNA. So carcinogens
um radiation is a big driver of cancer.
It damages both nuclear DNA and
mitochondria. And the other things are
viruses. Viruses tend to concentrate
their pathology in mitochondria. So they
they really, you know, can be a
metabolic cause of this disease. Um, and
we're just getting a hand, you know, of
course, a handle on all the viruses that
have such a tremendous impact.
Um, so when we're talking about the the
metabolic part, um, what are
mitochondria?
Mitochondria are the little cellular
organels within every cell. There's
about a thousand per cell that generate
energy. So you generate about 90% of
your cellular energy in your
mitochondria. And you and you do it
doing something called respiration,
which is the creation of energy with
oxygen. And so the mitochondrial theory
of cancer contends that once you reach
this threshold level of mitochondrial
damage within a cell, the cell has to
revert to this sort of antiquated method
of energy generation which is called
fermentation. And we all we're familiar
with fermentation. It's what happens
when you sprint or lift weights and when
you generate large amount of lactic
acid. That's fermentation. You use blood
glucose to generate energy down a very
inefficient pathway and then you have a
toxic byproduct which is lactic acid. So
when you look at a cancer cell almost
ubiquitously they've reverted to that
sort of energy generation and even in
the presence of oxygen they're
generating tremendous amounts of lactic
acid. So they're sort of bypassing the
mitochondria. So that's the really the
crux of the mitochondria theory that
once you have a threshold mitochondrial
damage the cell reverts to this this
method of energy generation and the
mitochondria send this epigenetic signal
to the nuclear DNA which instructs it
instructs it to uh to to encode all the
proteins that that drive all the
hallmark features of cancer. So then you
see the pathological cell growth and all
the things that we know the cancer cell
does.
So, do we understand what's triggering
this?
Well, yeah. Yeah. The same this goes
back again to the same uh you know the
car carcinogens and this is what tricked
researchers throughout the century is
you could look at how a carcinogen acts
and it they they almost always damage uh
mitochondria.
And so what happens is when once you get
the mito
the generation of sufficient energy is
required to maintain to keep to maintain
nuclear integrity to repair DNA. So once
the cell can't generate enough energy
that it's unable to repair its DNA. So
the mutations that we see in the cancer
cell that we always thought were the
cause according to the mitochondrial
theory appear to be a side effect of the
disease. So that that's you know goes
back again to all the same things that
we know cause cancer really do damage
our mitochondria.
Okay. So um when we're just looking
overall at cancer so um you know talking
about this theory and everything but um
one thing I found shocking in your book
is I don't think I realized how likely
how high of a chance that we all had to
get cancer.
you know, I think it was like one in
every two men can can get cancer in
their lifetime.
That's right. I believe it's the
statistic now is 40%
um of all of us men and women will be
diagnosed with cancer at some point
during their lifetimes and of course
more men than women are diagnosed and
then of those 40% um diagnosed another
40% will die from the disease. And so I
think in the US that equates to in 2016
almost uh 1.7 million diagnosises
and then that resulted in about I think
600,000 deaths. And so the the the most
important statistic to focus in all that
is, you know, the death rates because
that tells us how well we're doing in
the war on cancer. And on the NCI's
website, they'll show a steady decline
in cancer death rates. But when you look
at the statistics, you know, depending
on how you look at the statistics, you
can interpret them in a in a a few
different ways. And if you read the
book, The Truth in Small Doses by
Clifton Leaf, he does a really good job
of parsing through these statistics. And
his conclusion is the cancer death rates
really have not changed much since the
1950s.
Um, you know, that that's pretty um
scary actually because we've made all
these breakthroughs with other things
and cancer hasn't changed at all.
Yeah. And it just goes to show that our
focus is 100% wrong. I we wouldn't say
100% but it's misguided in that we focus
on treating the disease after it's
acquired. And it's been a you know we we
have made strides in certain subsets of
cancer but overall it's been sort of a
losing battle. The majority of people's
opinions now is the war on cancer has
been a dismal failure and the the what
we should be focusing on clearly is
prevention because that's where you can
make the biggest impact.
Uh well, it sounds like it. I mean, if
we have a 40 to 50% chance of
contracting cancer, I think we all need
to make these steps for prevention so
that we just don't get it.
Right. Right.
Yeah. Um we are going to take a quick
break. We're talking today with Travis
Christopherson. He's the author of
Tripping Over the Truth: How the
Metabolic Theory of Cancer is
Overturning: One of Medicine's Most
Entrenched Paradigms. We'll be back
shortly,
[Music]
helping you make informed decisions for
your life. This is Voice America Health
and Wellness.
Tune in to the Voice America Variety
channel on the Voice America Talk Radio
Network. Voice America Variety
broadcasts a diverse array of topics
reaching a global community. Our experts
come from all walks of life and the
topics they discuss are everything from
current events, arts and entertainment,
leadership, parenting, relationships,
self-improvement, career advice, and a
variety of other topics. Check us out
today. You're sure to find something of
interest. Voice America Variety talk on
today's hot topics.
The Voice America live events page is
here now to showcase your corporate,
individual, or organizations live event.
Visit voiceamea.com/live
events to see all of our past live
events and find out more. Whether it's a
multi-day conference, special speaker,
or single day event, we've got
everything to make your event a success.
We can do a few hours or a few days. For
more information about taking your event
to the next level, call Jeff Spanard at
48-294-6417
or email info@voiceamea.com.
Again, that's Jeff Spanard at
48-294-6417
or send us an email to
info@voiceamea.com.
They say you can't change the weather,
but we already have. And if we've
changed it for the worse, let's change
it for the better. Tune in to the
Climate Opportunity, a 2-hour special
hosted by Beth Green and Dr. Grant Dean,
expert guests, Professor Scott Denning,
Chef Laura Steck, video journalist Peter
Sinclair, and Kelsey Worth of Women
Outfront will share how we can improve
our lives while improving our weather.
Listen on Inside Out Radio, Tuesday,
November 11th, starting at 2 p.m.
Pacific time on the Voice America 7th
Wave channel, presented by Inside Out
Radio and Voice America.
These days, everyone is looking for
information on staying young, healthy,
and fit. The Voice America Health and
Wellness Network is here to help you on
your quest to better health and a better
you. We talk about everything from diet,
fitness, and aging to substance abuse,
personal growth, mental health, and much
more. Learn from our experts who cover
health and wellness from traditional and
holistic perspectives. Tune in to the
Voice America Health and Wellness
Network. Healthy living starts here.
Your life, your health, your network.
You're listening to Voice America Health
and Wellness.
[Music]
You are listening to Falling Through the
Cracks with your host, Dr. Rebecca Risk.
To reach the program today, please call
in to 1866472-5792.
Again, that's 1866-472-5792.
You may also send an email directly to
Dr. Risk. The email address is an
anticalgary@gmail.com.
Now back to falling through the cracks.
Feel alive and thrive.
Hi everybody. Welcome back. Today we're
talking with Travis Christopherson. He's
the author of Tripping Over the Truth:
How the Metabolic Theory of Cancer is
Overturning One of Medicine's Most
Entrenched Paradigms. So Travis, before
the break, you mentioned the war on
cancer. What is that?
Well, the way we traditionally know the
war on cancer was the National Cancer
Act, which was signed into existence, I
believe, on Christmas Day in 1971 by
Richard Nixon. And it was kind of an
interesting time period because we had
just landed on the moon. Um, when you
watch the video, you know, you can kind
of detect the hubris in everybody that
they they genuinely believed we would
have cancer solved within a short
period. And it was this was on the heels
of lots of um big breakthroughs in
medicine. We and we and in cancer we had
just f fell certain forms of childhood
leukemia, testicular cancer, um Hodkins
disease. So we'd had some pretty
profound successes using just a handful
of systemic toxins, the traditional
chemotherapy that we know and of course
surgery and radiation. So the the you
know the the general tone at the time is
that we'd have this disease figured out
and cured within you know if not 5 years
to a little after that time and the
metaphor that Dominic Dagustinino kind
of used when he he wrote just wrote the
forward for my the version of the book
was that Ted Kennedy was in the
background when Nixon signed this and
and then if you fast forward 40 years of
course you know he got brain cancer
and the same treatment paradigm that was
available to him back then more or less
was available for him today and that
they were not not able to appreciably
extend life beyond where it was 40 years
ago. And that's kind of a metaphor for
how the war of cancer really has gone.
Well, it is a little distressing. I
mean, you you told me before the break
that that the statistics on cancer
haven't changed much since the 1950s,
and we're almost 70 years later, and
we're doing the same things, and we're
getting the same results, and there has
been no change, even though there's a
tremendous amount of of studies and
research and awareness about cancer.
Yeah.
Yeah. And it just
it goes to the you know if you follow
the science you'll see what h what what
clearly happened was in the 70s we had
just like I said this handful of
systemic toxins the cytotoxic
chemotherapy and we the NCI pushed and
pushed and pushed and they thought that
these would be able to if you pushed
hard enough you'd be able to fall the
the very tough cancers the solid tumors
that account for most of the deaths and
we just hit a brick wall. they just were
unable to move cancer death rates past
that and the statistic now if you look
at chemotherapy as an adjunctive therapy
um only confers 2.9% increase in
survival so it doesn't do a whole lot
but then we transitioned in the mid70s
to the era of targeted therapy we
thought we understood the exact details
of what was causing cancer these key um
mutations to to genes and so we
transitioned to this era of targeted
therapy and again research just thought
we'd have this figured out, you know, in
roughly a decade's time. And we've been
at this for a hell of a long time. And
and the targeted therapy again has been
abysmal failure. It just has not touched
cancer death rates. And if you look at
the science, you know, now I think the
reason that the reason why this is we
understand is because we're not
targeting the true source of the
disease.
So let let's just talk a little bit
about what chemotherapy is. I found the
history of that quite fascinating. Um,
and you know, you're calling it a toxin
and I think that part is interesting
that you know, people that are are that
ill being exposed to what they are
exposed to. Can you just tell us a
little bit about that?
Yeah. Yeah. Chemotherapy kind of
ironically was was first identified out
of a in World War II. It was a war gas.
And there was this kind of there was
this horrific accident in Italy in a
harbor in Italy where the Germans bombed
the Allies. The Allies thought that it
was us and Italy, the Italians. We
thought that the the Luftwaffa, the
German air force was stretched way too
thin to attack. And they did. They
attacked and they dropped bombs on all
these ships in the harbor. They were
just sitting ducks. And one of them uh
the the US Paul or the US Harvey I think
it was was stockpiled with tons and tons
of mustard gas. And so it released all
this mustard gas onto the troops. And
they the US flew in doctors to take
samples and they brought these samples
back and I think it it was responsible
for a thousand military and civilian
deaths this release of that mustard gas.
So they brought these samples back and
what they noticed was there was this
sharp depletion of lymphoid tissue. So
the lymph the lymph the the immune
system was unable to generate white
blood cells and of course these doctors
made this connection to well that's what
lymphoma is is the overp production of
white blood cells perhaps this mustard
gas could be a chemotherapy and can't
researchers were desperate for
chemotherapy at that time all they had
for the longest time was was surgery and
radiation so they wanted this third line
of treatment that they could take the
fight to cancer anywhere within the body
so that was our first development of of
um chemotherapy and and we achieved
these sort of flickering remissions in
in leukemia patients, but then it was
off to the races to find other toxins
and the only you know all we knew about
the cancer cell at that time was it was
dividing. So we just look for toxins
that would inhibit cellular division and
of course they're terribly you know
toxic because they inhibit cellular
division throughout our bodies and
that's how we regenerate. That's how we
grow hair. That's how we grow our gut
lining and that's why of course
chemotherapy patients lose their hair
and have such tremendous nausea. Um but
yeah, there's no there's no denying that
these are systemic toxins and it it's
truly you know we'll look back on this
as a as a medieval period of treatment
without a doubt.
Well, it it seems terrifying to me that
it's stopping the person's body growth
as well. Like I'm I'm wondering, you
know, from a the perspective of a health
practitioner, how that's keeping this
patient healthy when they're in this
fight for their life.
Yeah. And and again, it you have to take
every individual case of cancer
differently because chemotherapy is
absolutely remarkable for uh for
example, for testicular cancer. It's a
90ome percent cure rate. So when you
look individually for cancers, there are
some that respond extraordinarily well
to chemo. But again, of course, the
patients have these side effects. It
would be be wonderful if we could
present better options to them. But then
as you go down the line for for certain
forms of brain cancer, you know, the
rest of the very difficult cancers, lung
cancers and so forth, if you look at the
statistics as adjunctive therapies,
chemotherapy doesn't confer much in the
uh you know, as far as survival goes.
But we still put patients through this
all the time.
So when after people go through
chemotherapy,
um is there a chance even if the cancer
is in remission, is there a chance that
it's going to come back?
Yeah. Well, yeah, there's Yeah, there's
always that chance. And they looked at,
you know, even the cancers they were
able to cure, the childhood leukemias
and so forth, when you look back through
the statistics, the meta analysis of the
patients that were cured, they have much
much higher rates of acquiring different
types of cancers throughout their lives.
So you don't necessarily walk away
unades, you know, if you when you go
through that process.
And so do do we understand why we have a
higher chance of of them developing more
cancer? Is that because of um you know
with the metabolic theory that there's
something going on in their body or is
it do we know what's why that is?
You know I I would be reluctant to say
exactly why. I I you know clearly just
the exposure to that amount of it and
and ironically chemotherapy agents are
extremely carcinogenic.
So just that robust exposure to that
amount of a carcinogen over time um just
is enough to plant the seeds you know
for future development of cancers.
Yeah. Yeah. I can see that if there's a
if carcinogens are causing cancer and
the the treatment is carcinogenic but
like you said it should be an individual
decision according to the type of cancer
and whether it's effective. Um, now is
there a correlation because you talked
in your book about shrinking a tumor?
Um, does that extend the person's life?
Yeah. Yeah. That Yeah, that's right. The
FDA used that criteria to get drugs
approved. It just had to shrink a tumor
without necessarily even having it
confer to um increase survival, which of
course is absurd. Um there is a
correlation. You know, if you can shrink
a tumor, typically you you'll get a
increase in survival. But there's
examples of drugs that
will shrink tumors or even just change
their morphology, just like kind of blow
the tumors apart. And it looks like
they're having this anti-cancer effect,
but then you look at the survival and
there's um you know, extremely marginal
increase or no increase in survival at
all. So, it's a bad in in general that
can be you know, a bad sort of indicator
of a the utility of a chemotherapy
agent.
So what you know when we're looking at
um treatments for cancer there's
chemotherapy is and the radiation that
that we all know and of course removing
the tumor. Is there anything else that
um you know any other drugs or anything
that can help?
Oh yeah. Yeah. That's a great question.
And there's getting to be more and more
options for for people. And you have to
find oncologists that are bold and smart
and willing to do things and they're not
just shutting their eyes and and
delivering out standard of care because
there are there are so many good options
out there now for people. Um I I would
direct them towards one one exciting
area is called repurpose drugs. There's
a list of about 80 drugs that um have
offtarget anti-cancer effects, meaning
their original intended target was not
bad, but they do have anti-cancer
effects. They're already FDA approved.
We know their toxicity profile. Many of
these are non-toxic or very low toxic.
And so, a lot of oncologists are
recommending, you know, using a sort of
cocktail of these repurposed drugs
alongside standard of care. And the
purpose is to sort of, you know, boost
the output of standard of care. And and
there's a lot of evidence, you know, not
our our typical burden of proof evidence
is a phase three randomized trial, but
there's a lot of other EV preclinical
and phase one type evidence suggesting
this is working. So there's clinics
doing that. One of them is called CARE,
which is based in London. Um,
Careoncology Clinic based in London.
Another thing is just using metabolic
therapies. And I I would look at a a a
clinic called chemotheria in Istanbul,
Turkey, a very young oncologist um that
kind of searched around. He found my
book and Dr. Safe's work. and he's
implementing these metabolic therapies,
ketogenic diet, fasting before
chemotherapy, glycolytic inhibitors,
hyperbaric oxygen again alongside
standard of care because these guys have
to use standard of care or they get in
trouble and but they can use the very
lowest on the dose range of chemotherapy
which he is doing. And he's got metadata
showing that he's able to boost um the
survival in lung cancer by about 400%
when you add these metabolic protocols
on. In addition, they seem to uh help
people go through chemotherapy with less
side effects for a variety of reasons.
So, yeah, there are there's getting to
be a lot of options for people out there
now.
Well, and it it sounds like we need
those changes if we haven't had a change
in in the outcome of cancer in in uh you
know, 70 years. Um something's got to
got to shift. Something's got to
need them. Yeah.
Yeah. Um, so when we're going back to
the metabolic theory of cancer and we
talked about the injured mitochondria,
um, what what exactly like are there a
lot of studies to show this? I guess we
can talk about that.
Lot Yeah, lots and and that was kind of
the, you know, the narrative of my book.
These studies go all the way back to
with the the German scientist Otto
Warberg who was a Nobel Prizewinning
scientist, brilliant biochemist and he
was the first to notice this what is now
called the Warberg effect, the fact that
cancer cells have uh this metabolic
abnormality and are are burning sugar
and generating lactic acid. And then the
question was why? And then later in
Warberg's career about the 50s, he
contended the reason why was was because
of damage to mitochondria. But then the
work sort of died off there um as DNA
was discovered and the focus shifted to
the genetics of the cancer cell. But
behind the scenes, there was all this
data being collected about Warberg's
original theory, but it was kind of
shoved to the side. Nobody took it very
seriously. Um but then again it was
brought back into light after the cancer
genome atlas project has shown that
somatic mutations cannot be the only
cause. There has to be other driving
factors to this disease. So Warberg's
original metabolic theory has kind of
made this striking comeback.
Okay. Um we're going to take a quick
break. We're going to talk about this
more when we get back. Today we're
talking with Travis Kristofferson. He's
the author of Tripping Over the Truth:
How the Metabolic Theory of Cancer is
Overturning One of Medicine's Mo most
Entrenched Paradigms. We'll be back
shortly.
[Music]
A fresh look at today's health. Voice
America Health and Wellness.
Now there's a new destination for video
content. Voiceamea.tv.
Just like our radio channels and so much
more. Voice America Variety, Health and
Wellness, Business, Sports, Green Talk,
PowerUp Motorsports, and Seventh Wave
Network now have their own video channel
components. Plus, check out exclusive
programming including movies, music,
educational courses, science and
history, current events, and short
features, highdefinition, premier
quality programs available 24/7. Voice
america.tv. If you think you've seen
online TV like this before, let us
surprise you. Are you finding your
frequency? It can be described as that
space between failure and success. It's
the future of digital media. It's
finding your voice. It's engaging
topics, content, and ideas. Jeff and
Ryan discuss the digital media space and
all of its aspects. It's about making
the mistakes, taking the chances,
summoning the intestinal fortitude to
step out of your comfort zone, and
discovering what you can accomplish when
you decide to try. Decide to learn,
decide that you have something to say,
and find your frequency. Live Fridays at
2:00 p.m. Pacific time, 5:00 p.m.
Eastern time on the Voice America
Variety Channel.
Have you become a member yet? Sign up
now to become a member of Voice America.
It's always free and easy. Plus, you get
to take advantage of some great member
benefits. Get unlimited access to
millions of hours of ondemand content
across all of our channels. Keep track
of your favorite episodes, shows, and
hosts in your own customizable library.
Find out what shows you might be
interested in based on your favorites.
Plus, you get insider access with our
newsletter. Membership gives you more.
Sign up at voiceamea.com and click
register at the top right. Have you had
a chance to check out Voiceame's online
magazine and blog, Press Pass? If you
love our hosts and shows, check out
articles that give an even deeper
perspective, plus topics about health
and fitness, movie reviews, philosophy,
business tips and tactics, spirituality,
positive thought, current events, and
even more about your favorite host. It's
just a click away at varapresspass.com.
That's varapresspass.com.
VARSpass by Voice America. All access
all the time. Your favorite Voice
America Talk Radio Network shows and
hosts are in your car, outdoors, and
wherever you need them to be. Listen
anywhere. Get our mobile app for iPhone,
BlackBerry, or Android at the Apple
iTunes App Store, BlackBerry AppWorld,
or Android Market.
Your life, your health, your network.
You're listening to Voice America Health
and Wellness.
You are listening to Falling Through the
Cracks with your host Dr. Rebecca Riss.
To reach the program today, please call
in to 1866472-5792.
Again, that's 1866472-5792.
You may also send an email directly to
Dr. Risk. The email address is an
anticalgary@gmail.com.
Now, back to falling through the cracks.
feel alive and thrive.
Hi everybody, welcome back. Today we're
talking with Travis Christopherson. He's
the author of Tripping Over the Truth:
How the Metabolic Theory of Cancer is
Overturning One of Medicine's Most
Entrenched Paradigms. So Travis, we've
talked a lot about the um metabolic
theory of cancer and of course you
you've mentioned the the the keto the
ketogenic diet. Can you just tell us a
little bit about what that is?
Yeah. So Tom Safe is sort of one of the
scientists responsible for resurrecting
Warberg's old theory about the metabolic
theory of cancer and he wrote this this
science book called uh cancer is a
metabolic disease. I think it came out
in 2012
and goes through, you know, the the
hundred years of evidence that support
this theory that cancer has a metabolic
origin. And then he touched on some of
the potential interventions based on the
metabolic theory. And one of them came
that came to light was this what's
called a ketogenic diet. And the
ketogenic diet has actually been around
since the 1920s and was once actually
standard of care for pediatric epilepsy.
So, it's a well-known sort of medical
intervention type diet. And what it is
is you you transition away from
carbohydrate metabolism towards fat
metabolism. And it it's sort of a
mimicking. It's a dietary mimicking of
the fasting state. So, you'll you cut
out almost all of your carbohydrates.
It's traditionally done in a 4:1 ratio.
Four parts fat to one part protein and
carbohydrate. And when you transition
that that way, you'll burn through all
your uh sugar stores in your liver. And
that takes about 24 hours. And then your
body has to burn fat. So you'll you'll
generate these molecules called ketone
bodies. That's why it's called the
ketogenic diet. And the ketone bodies
will replace glucose as a circulating
source of fuel. And the interesting
thing about ketone bodies is they can
only be burned in functioning
mitochondria. They have to be burned
oxidatively with oxygen. And so Safe
Reed made that connection. Well, if the
cancer cell has to burn sugar or prefers
to burn sugar and has trouble burning,
you know, generating energy oxidatively,
this dietary transition would put stress
on the cancer cell. And there's a lot
of, you know, preclinical evidence that
suggests that's exactly the case. And so
what we're kind of understanding now, I
think there's about 10 to 12 trials in
recruiting right now for the ketogenic
diet in the United States testing it as
a cancer therapy. But in general, what
we've kind of noticed is its greatest
utility appears to be that it can just
greatly enhance the efficacy of other
treatments. So Tom Safe just has
generated this idea called the press
pulse scenario where the dietary
intervention is the press that cancer
patients can use and then when you add
in these pulses and it can even be lowd
dose chemotherapy you'll just get much
much improved efficacy and we're
starting to that's what we saw in the
Turkish data is that we do see you know
this greatly enhanced efficacy of
traditional treatments when patients are
in this ketogenic state.
Um so uh one thing that you also talk
about is calorie restriction along with
fasting. Um how does that help?
Yeah. So the ketogenic diet is is again
just the m maintenance of the fasting
state and what happens when you fast
again you'll burn through all your
carbohydrate stores and so you'll have
to turn to fat to to survive and the
body will start burning visceral you
know fat atapost tissue and generating
these ketone bodies to survive and it's
a remarkably uh efficient mode of energy
generation. Ketone bodies have about two
times the thermodynamic energy as a
molecule of sugar. So that's why human
beings can survive so long. An average
person can survive about a month um
without food, just water. And I think
the record fast was a an obese guy in
Scotland. I think he weighed when he
began the fast was well over 300 lb and
he fasted for over a year. So that it's
the maintenance of the fasting state.
And when the when when you do when
you're in this state is it's not just
energy reduction for the cancer cell.
We're also researchers are finding out
that there's all these sort of
epigenetic transitions going on that
downregulate all the important anka
genes that are driving cancer. So
there's much much more to it beyond just
this kind of energy restriction that
safe originally noticed. There's there's
much you know we see we see a slowing of
the growth of cancer and it just all the
features the hallmark features of cancer
cells seem to be to tamper down because
through this diet
um well you know I I always find um that
part fascinating. I did a a show um on
fasting and we were talking about type 2
diabetes. Um but obviously the the
fasting and calorie restriction does
more for us than just prevent um or
reverse diabetes,
right? And and that's that this next
level that we're learning is is uh
diabetes, you know, it's such a complex
disease, but epigenetically we see
there's actually a downregulation of um
insulin expression in type 2 diabetes um
and of course insulin sensitivity. And
you have to ask why that's occurring.
And when you look at the epigenetic
marks, you can see that they've changed
in a type 2 diabetic. And so the
ketogenic diet um you know clearly
shifts away from carbohydrate
metabolism, which is the problem of a
type 2 diabetic, but it's also their
their epigenetic ketone bodies are
epigenetic modulators. So they're
changing our epigenetic expression. Um
and you know, greatly. Uh type 2
diabetes is vastly improved. I I I
haven't seen anybody that hasn't been
approved on a ketogenic diet or or by
passing which is the same thing. Yeah.
Yeah. And that that was the the big part
of this show. He was a nephrologist um
Jason Fun in Toronto and and uh he
reversed type 2 diabetes and got people
off their medication with doing
intermittent fasting and changing some
other things as well obviously but that
was the biggest part was the calorie
restriction.
Powerful tool. Yeah, very powerful tool.
or just understanding exactly why.
So, um it's interesting. Of course,
we're looking at cancer as a metabolic
disease and uh um so we're, you know,
the title of your book is um changing
this the this paradigm of how we view
cancer. And this is it. It definitely
does change how you view it. Um you
know, when we're thinking, oh, it's
genetic, so I can't do anything about
it. um you know that that kind of also
leaves it a little more scary for people
as well because we know we have a 40%
chance of getting cancer and then we
can't do anything about it and it's
chaotic and uncontrollable. Um I like I
like this idea and I you know reading
all the studies in your book and the
stories it just it made more sense to me
that this is something that we can
prevent and we have more control over.
Yeah. And that that's the take-home
message. you're right is that that
paradigm shift from a disease that's
that's randomly occurring to one that's
um you know potentially preventable and
you have all kinds of control in the
treatment aspect of it for sure. Yeah.
Um, one thing I I found interesting and
you touched on this as well was a a
story of um someone doing the the
ketogenic diet along with their chemo
and I think it was a few people and they
they didn't have um the horrible side
effects that other people were getting
from the from the treatment.
Yeah, that's a study from Walter Longo,
UCLA, and he actually the study he did
was actually fasting. He had patients
fast before chemotherapy for 48 to I
think 90 some hours and uh you know
which is the quickest way to enter what
we call ketosis generating ketone bodies
and um when he did that with patients he
measured their side effects from
chemotherapy and I think he measured 14
different side effects and every single
one of the side effects was very
significantly diminished including the
ones you can measure the number of times
you vomit you know diarrhea
mouth sores and so forth. And the
vomiting went from I I don't know the
number of times the people that didn't
fast vomited, but the ones that did
fast, it went down to zero. So, it's a
very and and you know, you we don't have
time to get into the the biochemical
reasons why this is occurring, but
there's very good, you know, very
elegant uh science behind why this is
occurring. And the fact we can see it
occur is is even more compelling.
Um, well, it it it seems to me also to
to give a little bit of hope because if
you're um, you know, going through
treatment, you have a little more
control over what's going to happen to
you. And it it's the opposite of what is
recommended when people go through these
treatments. You know, um having watched
a family member um go through cancer and
and succumb to it. Um you know, she was
told, "Oh, eat ice cream and and eat,
you know, anything that basically you
wouldn't want to be eating on a
ketogenic diet." And and I'm wondering
would that if we know fasting and and
this diet can help with those side
effects, would doing the opposite make
it worse?
I would say yes. And and I you know I
number one um we can see that in the
epidemiological data that high sugar
diet correlates with um more cancer,
type 2 diabetes correlates with more
cancer. Um so yeah, I mean you can see
it just in the epidemiological data and
and just knowing the basic biology
behind the cancer cell. When an
oncologist looks at a PET scan, that's
what they're looking at. They're looking
at cancer cells voracious appetite for
sugar. That's why the image lights up.
Um, so just based on that alone, the
fact that you recommend Jell-O or ice
cream is it just seems crazy.
Um, yeah, I I agree because you know,
you talk in your book about, yeah, the
cancer is feeding off of sugar and here
we are going through chemo and eating
whatever we want and sugar and and
feeding the cancer even more and making
it it worse,
right? And not even to mention the fact
that the cancer cells have 16 times the
number of uh insulin receptors as normal
cells. So, they're absolutely primed to
uh respond to that sugar intake insulin
response. they that's how they derive
their energy and their materials for
cell division.
That's pretty crazy. Um so if somebody's
listening and they're wondering um how
to get started um just as even
prevention um how uh would you recommend
that they go about doing so?
As far as prevention goes, you know, one
of the things safer and and you've
touched on that he recommends is um
intermittent fasting is a way to
stimulate this process called autophagy.
And that's sort of the cellular cleaning
house mechanism. It gets rid of all the
defunct proteins and it can even get rid
of defunct mitochondria. So that's a
wonderful sort of preventative
regeneration tool that we have. Um,
beyond that, you know, the advice that
your grandma gave you still holds. You
just avoid chemicals, get sunshine, eat
well. And I think one of the, you know,
general tenants that we're really
realizing now is just that you got to
avoid avoid sugar. And we see that in
the NIH life um, extension caloric
restriction uh, studies with monkeys.
There was two studies and the the ones
with the higher sugar diet did the did
the worst. So that as a general rule
holds um as far as prevention goes and
then as far you know if you are
diagnosed there there is so many more
options now and the internet's a fasting
is a great tool. It can also be a um you
know
there's bad stuff in the internet so you
have to sort through it in a good way
but those two things I mentioned to you
are good places to start. Uh yeah there
there's a lot of lot of good options
nowadays. Well, you know, just looking
at the sugar part and and I've talked
about sugar a lot on this show, but I I
don't think we can ever talk about it
enough. You know, the um when I counsel
people to go off of sugar, um they think
it'll be easy and then they come back
and they had started reading labels and
they're they're baffled and realize how
how difficult it is to actually avoid
sugar and added sugar in what they're
eating.
Yeah. It's it's and then you just, you
know, you fall back to the advice of
just eat real food. Just eat food that
you know what it is and it's not in a
box and then you can know the sugar
content.
Exactly. And you know, if if we're if
we're so confused that and we're eating
that much packaged food, there's
probably going to be some some other
issues with the food that we're eating.
And uh we should go back to the leafy
greens and whole grains and and you
know, the the healthy proteins. Yeah.
And of course the fats.
Yeah. There you go. Of course the fats.
Yeah.
Can't forget that. Hey.
So, um I I just want to talk a little
bit more about the the ketogenic diet
because I know when I read it, it is all
it's a lot of its fats as well. Um so,
um and of course I grew up in an era
that was low fat. So, what does that
mean to be on a a diet that that focuses
on fats,
you know? Well, when you when you talk
about the ketogenic diet too, the way
I'm talking about it is is a medical
intervention. So, you can everybody else
can have the debate about and there, you
know, the ongoing debate about whether
the ketogenic diet is a great thing to
maintain over your life or periodically
throughout your life. Some people say
it, you know, it is and and they perform
and feel so much better doing it, but as
a medical intervention, I'm talking
about, you know, for cancer therapy. And
if you want to take all the guesswork
out of it, there's companies now that
will make prepackaged ketogenic meals
for cancer patients so they don't have
to learn what this diet is, you know,
right post diagnosis. Um, it's just what
you want to do is is maintain you'll
drop your blood glucose on this diet and
you'll raise ketones and then you'll get
in what they call this therapeutic
window for for cancer um therapy. So,
that's what we're going out after this.
And the uh you can pro I can probably
send you the links to some of those
companies um doing the the prepackaged
diets.
Yeah, I think um one place people good
place for people to start is by reading
your book to understand what we're
talking about. Um can you just tell us
where people can find that?
Uh yeah, the book is, you know, various
various little boutique bookstores and
it's on Amazon and that's the easiest
place to get it. It's just right off
Amazon.
Perfect. And do you have a website or a
way people can contact you for more
information? Yeah, you can contact me
through the my my the foundation website
which is a single cause single cure and
it's just a small cancer foundation that
um 100% of the money goes to uh cancer
metabolic cancer research.
That's perfect. Well, I want to thank
you so much for joining me today. This
was a really informative episode.
Yeah, thank you Rebecca.
And I want to thank everybody for
listening. We were talking today with
Travis Kristofferson. He's the author of
Tripping Over the Truth: How the
Metabolic Theory of Cancer is
Overturning One of Medicine's Most
Entrenched Paradigms. So, thanks so much
for listening and be sure to make today
a great day.
Thank you for tuning in to this week's
edition of Falling Through the Cracks.
Feel alive and thrive. Please join Dr.
Rebecca Risk again next Monday at noon
Eastern time and 9:00 a.m. Pacific time
on the Voice America Health and Wellness
channel. We'll talk more next week.
[Music]
Thanks again for listening to the
preceding program brought to you on the
Voiceamea Health and Wellness channel.
For more information about our network
and to check out additional show hosts
and topics of interest, please visit
voiceameahhealth.com.
The VoiceAmerica Talkra Radio Network is
the worldwide leader in live internet
talk radio. Visit voiceamea.com. The
views and ideas expressed on the
preceding program are strictly those of
the host or guests and do not
necessarily reflect the